[Drug-resistance patterns of clinical isolates of Pseudomonas aeruginosa in  regard to their lipopolysaccharide-chain sizes].

Pseudomonas aeruginosa strains isolated from patients with different types of the  infections each consisted of LPSs different in chain sizes. The  drug-susceptibility patterns of these strains of P. aeruginosa were investigated   to clarify the relationship between the LPS-compositions and susceptibility to  some kinds of anti-pseudomonal drugs. The susceptibilities of nineteen strains  (seven long-LPS strains, four short-LPS strains and eight LPS-deficient strains)   to piperacillin, ceftazidime, gentamicin, norfloxacin and polymyxin-B were  determined and these strains were classified into six types (Types I-VI)  according to their drug resistance patterns. Six of the eight LPS-deficient  strains were found to be highly resistant to gentamicin alone (Type IV). Four of   the seven strains with the long-LPS and one strain with the short-LPS were  resistant to three drugs such as piperacillin, ceftazidime and norfloxacin, and  classified into Type I. These results indicated that the major part of the  LPS-deficient strains and the considerable part of the long-chain LPS strains of   P. aeruginosa tested had each characteristic profile in the drug resistance. The   outer membrane proteins of thirteen strains, consisting of different types of LPS  compositions, were analyzed by SDS-PAGE. The strains belonging to the same types   of the drug resistance patterns were found to have similar OMP-profiles, although  a few exceptions were found. beta-lactamase and gentamicin inactivating  activities were determined for piperacillin resistant and gentamicin resistant  strains, respectively. Of the piperacillin resistant strains tested, the activity  of beta-lactamase was high in one (No. 8) only, low in four and not found in  four. The results showed that degrees of resistance of P. aeruginosa strains  tested to piperacillin did not correlate to their producibility of beta-lactamase  except one strain. Of the nine gentamicin resistant strains tested, the  gentamicin inactivating activity was high in one (No. 30) only, moderate in six  and low in two. These results suggested that the significant levels of  piperacillin  or gentamicin resistance of P. aeruginosa isolated tested might be   expressed each due to their decreased abilities for drug permeabilities in  addition to drug inactivating activities such as beta-lactamase or  gentamicin modifying enzyme. In the case of some resistant strains, the  resistance to piperacillin or gentamicin was not explained by the results of the   present study. Therefore, we must investigate the possibility that other  mechanisms participate in the resistance of these strains.
