Construction of lysine-producing strains by gene disruption and replacement in  Brevibacterium divaricatum.

Gene disruption and replacement techniques were applied to block the biosynthesis  of threonine and methionine and thus to construct genetically stable lysine  producers in a glutamate-producing bacteria, Brevibacterium divaricatum. The  homoserine dehydrogenase gene (hom), homoserine kinase gene (thrB) and hom-thrB  operon were amplified as 1.8, 1.25 and 2.8 kb fragments from B. divaricatum by  polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and cloned in an E. coli-coryneform bacteria  shuttle vector, pSUMN18. These genes were disrupted by inserting a kanamycin  resistant gene (kan) from pUC4-KISS into the structural genes. Integrative  plasmids were constructed and transformed into B. divaricatum. Integrative  transformants could be obtained only when the integrative plasmids were  constructed from the plasmids which had escaped from the restriction barrier of  the hosts. The resulting integrative transformants showed kanamycin resistance  and contained no plasmids. About 1-10% of the transformants were auxotrophs. By  checking the nutritional requirement, it was found that all of these  transformants required threonine and/or homoserine as expected. Southern blot  analysis confirmed the integrations, and both single and double crossover  homologous recombination mechanisms were proposed to explain the integration and   replacement. These auxotrophic integrative transformants which were derived from   double crossover events accumulated 1-3% lysine in culture broth only when the  added threonine was limited. Integrative transformants which were  site-specifically inactivated in hom or hom-thrB genes produced more lysine than   did those only inactivated at the thrB gene. These transformants were extremely  stable, and the reversion frequency was below 10(-9) per generation. It is  suggested that this technique will be useful in the construction of stable  auxotrophic mutants.