[Infections of the respiratory tract with Pseudomonas aeruginosa in cystic  fibrosis].

The main cause of death in cystic fibrosis (CF) patients is progressive pulmonary  insufficiency frequently associated with chronic infections of the respiratory  tract by Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Bacteria of this species synthesize numerous  extracellular products contributing to its pathogenicity. An alginate-like  exopolysaccharide is characteristic for mucoid mutants predominating among P.  aeruginosa isolates from CF patients. It interferes with immune defense  mechanisms of the host and probably protects the bacteria against certain  antibiotics. Furthermore, it is involved in the formation of bacterial  microcolonies that resist mucociliary clearance, opsonisation, and phagocytosis.   Exotoxin A and elastase are regarded as the most important among various  extracellular enzymes involved in pulmonary injury in CF patients. Exotoxin A  inhibits eukaryotic protein synthesis leading to necrosis; elastase, together  with other Pseudomonas-proteases, induces hemorrhagic lesions and necrosis and  seems to inactivate immunoglobulins and complement factors. Phospholipase C and  glycolipid represent two hemolysins of P. aeruginosa that may contribute to  cytopathogenic effects in infected lungs. No primary defect in the immunological   defense mechanisms of CF patients has been described so far. Antibodies against  various P. aeruginosa antigens including those mentioned above have been  demonstrated, but a complete elimination of the bacteria from infected lungs has   not been observed. Therapy of pulmonary P. aeruginosa infections in CF patients  usually includes combinations of antibiotics of the beta-lactam and  aminoglycoside type. Difficulties arise from an unusually high intrinsic  resistance of P. aeruginosa as well as from poor penetration of many antibiotics   into the sputum of CF patients. Therefore, future efforts to manage the  Pseudomonas problem in CF will probably concentrate on prophylactic therapy, e.g.  childhood vaccination of CF patients in order to prevent bacterial colonization  of the respiratory tract.