Crystal structure of the multidrug efflux transporter AcrB at 3.1A resolution  reveals the N-terminal region with conserved amino acids. 

Crystal structures of the bacterial multidrug transporter AcrB in R32 and C2  space groups showing both symmetric and asymmetric trimeric assemblies,  respectively, supplemented with biochemical investigations, have provided most of  the structural basis for a molecular level understanding of the protein structure  and mechanisms for substrate uptake and translocation carried out by this 114-kDa  inner membrane protein. They suggest that AcrB captures ligands primarily from  the periplasm. Substrates can also enter the inner cavity of the transporter from  the cytoplasm, but the exact mechanism of this remains undefined. Analysis of the  amino acid sequences of AcrB and its homologs revealed the presence of conserved   residues at the N-terminus including two phenylalanines which may be exposed to  the cytoplasm. Any potential role that these conserved residues may play in  function has not been addressed by existing biochemical or structural studies.  Since phenylalanine residues elsewhere in the protein have been implicated in  ligand binding, we explored the structure of this N-terminal region to  investigate structural determinants near the cytoplasmic opening that may mediate  drug uptake. Our structure of AcrB in R32 space group reveals an N-terminus loop,  reducing the diameter of the central opening to approximately 15 A as opposed to   the previously reported value of approximately 30 A for crystal structures in  this space group with disordered N-terminus. Recent structures of the AcrB in C2   space group have revealed a helical conformation of this N-terminus but have not   discussed its possible implications. We present the crystal structure of AcrB  that reveals the structure of the N-terminus containing the conserved residues.  We hope that the structural information provides a structural basis for others to  design further biochemical investigation of the role of this portion of AcrB in  mediating cytoplasmic ligand discrimination and uptake.