Dynamics of repressor-operator recognition: the Tn10-encoded tetracycline  resistance control.

Binding of the Tet repressor to nonspecific and specific DNA leads to quenching  of the Tet fluorescence by approximately 22% and approximately 35%, respectively.  This effect is used for a direct, quantitative characterization of the binding  equilibria and dynamics involved in the recognition of the operator by its  repressor. From the dependence of the nonspecific binding constant on the ion  concentration, it is concluded that nonspecific binding is almost completely  driven by the entropy change resulting from the release of three to four Na+ ions  from the double helix upon protein binding. Formation of the specific complex is   driven by a higher entropy term resulting from the release of seven to eight Na+   ions and in addition by a free energy term of -33 kJ/mol from nonelectrostatic  interactions, which are attributed to the specific contacts. The dynamics of the   repressor-operator recognition are resolved by stopped-flow measurements at  various salt concentrations and for different DNA chain lengths into two separate  steps. The first step follows a second-order mechanism and results in an  intermediate complex associated with formation of about three to four  electrostatic contacts between protein and DNA; apparently, this complex is  equivalent to the nonspecific complex. The existence of an intermediate is also  indicated by experiments in mixed Na+-Mg2+ buffers, which can be described with  high accuracy by competition of Mg2+ and protein. The intermediate complex is  formed at a rate of 3 X 10(8) M-1 s-1 and is converted in the second reaction  step to the specific complex with a rate constant of 6 X 10(4) s-1, which is  almost independent of the salt concentration. Our interpretation and the  parameters obtained from our model are confirmed by competition of nonspecific  DNA with operator DNA for repressor binding. The observed maximal rate constant  of 3 X 10(8) M-1 s-1 is very close to theoretical predictions for the association  without a sliding mechanism. The very small dependence of the observed rate  constants on the chain length shows that the Tet repressor is not able to slide  over any substantial distance even at low salt concentrations. The question of a   potential contribution from sliding under our experimental conditions is  critically discussed. The absence of sliding in the case of the Tet repressor  under physiological conditions is compared with the high sliding efficiency of  the lac repressor and is discussed with respect to possible molecular mechanisms   of sliding in relation to biological function.