Anthracycline antibiotics in cancer therapy. Focus on drug resistance.

30 years ago an anthracycline antibiotic was shown to have antineoplastic  activity. This led to the development of well over 1000 analogues with a vast  spectrum of biochemical characteristics. Many biological actions have been  described. The original anthracyclines are active against many types of cancer  and are an integral part of several curative combinations. They are ineffective  against other tumours. Although some analogues show an altered spectrum of  activity or an improved therapeutic index relative to the older agents, it is not  clear that cardiotoxicity can be totally avoided with these agents. Primary and  secondary resistance to anthracyclines remain major clinical problems.  Pharmacokinetic studies have been of limited help in explaining this.  Overexpression of a surface-membrane permeability glycoprotein (Pgp) was  identified in ovarian cancer of patients who had clinical multidrug resistance in  1985. This led the way for the discovery of a number of resistance mechanisms in   vitro. Some of these have been found in more than 1 type of cell line, and more  than 1 mechanism may exist in a single cell. Additional resistance proteins have   been identified, qualitative and quantitative alterations of topoisomerase II  have been described, and some mechanisms in other systems have not yet been  identified. Some of these may prove to be important in clinical drug resistance.   Drugs such as calcium antagonists and cyclosporin, studied initially for their  ability to block the Pgp pump, appear to be heterogeneous in this capacity and  may have additional sites of action. It will be critical for clinical studies to   define the precise resistance mechanism(s) that must be reversed. To date this  has been difficult, even in trials ostensibly dealing with the original Pgp.  Liposomes can potentially alter toxicity and target drug delivery to specific  sites. In addition, they may permit the use of lipophilic drugs that would  otherwise be difficult to administer systemically. Resistant tumours may be  sensitive to anthracyclines delivered by liposomes. To reduce cardiac toxicity,  administering doxorubicin (adriamycin) by slow infusion through a central-venous   line should be considered whenever feasible. Monitoring of cardiac ejection  fraction and the use of endomyocardial biopsy will permit patients to be treated   safely after they reach the dose threshold at which heart failure begins to be a   potential risk. A number of structurally modified anthracyclines with the  potential advantages of decreased cardiotoxicity and avoidance of multidrug  resistance mechanisms are entering clinical trials. Meanwhile, the vast weight of  clinical experience leaves doxorubicin as a well tolerated and effective choice  for most potentially anthracycline sensitive tumours.