Gene activation mediated by protein kinase C in human macrophage and  teratocarcinoma cells expressing aminoglycoside phosphotransferase activity.

The bacterial neomycin phosphotransferase gene driven by the Moloney mouse  leukemia virus long terminal repeat (LTR) or SV40 early region promoter was  introduced into the human promonocyte-macrophage cell line, U937, and into the  pluripotential human embryonic teratocarcinoma cell line, NT2/D1. Clonally  derived cell lines capable of growing in 2-4 mg/ml of the aminoglycoside  antibiotic, G418 (Geneticin), were established and transfected with pHIVCat, a  plasmid expressing the bacterial chloramphenicol acetyl transferase (CAT)  activity under the control of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV-1) LTR. All  of the G418 resistant (neo(r)) U937 cell lines and 10 of 14 neo(r) NT2/D1 cell  lines exhibited reduced basal levels of CAT expression or impaired responses to  activation of the HIV-1 LTR by phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) when  compared to the parental lines. Other differences included inhibition of tat  activation of the HIV-1 LTR and increased sensitivity of U937 cells to human  tumor necrosis factor alpha. The expression of other eukaryotic promoters  including the HTLV-1 LTR, SV40 ori sequences, and the human beta-actin gene  promoter was similarly affected. However, differentiation of the neo(r) U937  cells into macrophages was neither delayed nor impaired. Because PMA is an  activator of protein kinase C (PKC) and a potent inducer of HIV-1 directed gene  expression, the amounts, sensitivity to G418, and cytosol to membrane  translocation of this enzyme were determined in the wild type and neo(r) U937  cells. G418 at concentrations too low to affect cell growth (12-150  micrograms/ml) inhibited PMA-induced transactivation responses in wild type cells  but did not inhibit PKC-dependent protein phosphorylation in vitro. PKC  activities in the wild type and neo(r) cells were similar in absolute amounts and  in the cytosol-membrane distribution of the enzyme. In contrast with wild type  cells, however, all of the cytosolic Ca(2+)-phospholipid-dependent form of PKC  disappeared from the neo(r) cells within 30 min after PMA induction. The results   suggested that, depending upon the cell type, gene cotransfer using  aminoglycoside resistance as a selectable marker may seriously perturb important   cellular control mechanisms such as the PKC pathway leading to activation of gene  expression.