Whole-Transcriptome and -Genome Analysis of Extensively Drug-Resistant  Mycobacterium tuberculosis Clinical Isolates Identifies Downregulation of ethA as  a Mechanism of Ethionamide Resistance. 

Genetics-based drug susceptibility testing has improved the diagnosis of  drug-resistant tuberculosis but is limited by our lack of knowledge of all  resistance mechanisms. Next-generation sequencing has assisted in identifying the  principal genetic mechanisms of resistance for many drugs, but a significant  proportion of phenotypic drug resistance is unexplained genetically. Few studies   have formally compared the transcriptomes of susceptible and resistant  Mycobacterium tuberculosis strains. We carried out comparative whole-genome  transcriptomics of extensively drug-resistant (XDR) clinical isolates using RNA  sequencing (RNA-seq) to find novel transcription-mediated mechanisms of  resistance. We identified a promoter mutation (t to c) at position -11 (t-11c)  relative to the start codon of ethA that reduces the expression of a  monooxygenase (EthA) that activates ethionamide. (In this article, nucleotide  changes are lowercase and amino acid substitutions are uppercase.) Using a flow  cytometry-based reporter assay, we show that the reduced transcription of ethA is  not due to transcriptional repression by ethR Clinical strains harboring this  mutation were resistant to ethionamide. Other ethA promoter mutations were  identified in a global genomic survey of resistant M. tuberculosis strains. These  results demonstrate a new mechanism of ethionamide resistance that can cause  high-level resistance when it is combined with other ethionamide  resistance-conferring mutations. Our study revealed many other genes which were  highly up- or downregulated in XDR strains, including a toxin-antitoxin module  (mazF5 mazE5) and tRNAs (leuX and thrU). This suggests that global  transcriptional modifications could contribute to resistance or the maintenance  of bacterial fitness have also occurred in XDR strains.