[Bacterial resistance to antibiotics].

50 years ago, the introduction of penicillin, followed by many other  antibacterial agents, represented an often underestimated medical revolution.  Indeed, until that time, bacterial infections were the prime cause of mortality,   especially in children and elderly patients. The discovery of numerous new  substances and their development on an industrial scale gave us the illusion that  bacterial infections were all but vanquished. However, the widespread and  sometimes uncontrolled use of these agents has led to the selection of bacteria  resistant to practically all available antibiotics. Bacteria utilize three main  resistance strategies: (1) modification of their permeability, (2) modification  of target, and (3) modification of the antibiotic. Bacteria modify their  permeability either by becoming impermeable to antibiotics, or by actively  excreting the drug accumulated in the cell. As an alternative, they can modify  the structure of the antibiotic's molecular target--usually an essential  metabolic enzyme of the bacterium--and thus escape the drug's toxic effect.  Lastly, they can produce enzymes capable of modifying and directly inactivating  antibiotics. In addition, bacteria have evolved extremely efficient genetic  transfer systems capable of exchanging and accumulating resistance genes. Some  pathogens, such as methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus and multiresistant  Mycobacterium tuberculosis, have become resistant to almost all available  antibiotics and there are only one or two substances still active against such  organisms. Antibiotics are very precious drugs which must be administered to  patients who need them. On the other hand, the development of resistance must be   kept under control by a better comprehension of its mechanisms and modes of  transmission and by abiding by the fundamental rules of anti-infectious  chemotherapy, i.e.: (1) choose the most efficient antibiotic according to  clinical and local epidemiological data, (2) target the bacteria according to the  microbiological data at hand, and (3) administer the antibiotic in an adequate  dose which will leave the pathogen no chance to develop resistance.