Tumor cell hybridization and neoplastic progression.

In the experiments reported here, I was unable to detect any fusion between host   cells and transplanted tumor cells; however, spontaneous hybridization between  tumor cells appears to occur in the B16 melanoma. This hybridization was  demonstrated by mixing together B16-F10RR cells (universal fusers) and B16-F10  cells, allowing them to grow in close juxtaposition, and recovering putative  hybrids in the appropriate selection media. The tumor cell-tumor cell composition  of the resultant hybrids is inferred from the relative frequency of fusions,  compared with the infrequency of tumor cell-host cell fusion when single  populations of B16-F10RR cells were used, and by the chromosomal content of the  hybrids. Definitive proof that hybridization occurs between both types of tumor  cell rather than between a tumor cell and some other type of cell would require  the use of a third biochemical marker on the unmarked tumor cells. I am now  repeating these experiments using B16-F10 cells that exhibit resistance to the  neomycinlike antibiotic G418. Nonetheless, it is not surprising to find that such  closely related tumor cells fuse with one another. The efficiency of in vitro  hybridization mediated by polyethylene glycol is increased when the hybridizing  cells are histologically or developmentally related, so that B16 melanoma cells  fuse more readily with one another than they do with unrelated cells such as  UV-2237 cells (I. Hart, unpublished observations). Moreover, early hybridization   protocols did not call for the use of fusogens, but merely the cocultivation of  participating cells in the two-dimensional constraints of a tissue culture dish  (e.g., Barski et al. 1961, Silagi 1967). Presumably, the increased contact  between cells within a growing tumor mass would increase the likelihood of such  spontaneous fusion. In vivo hybridization could play a significant role in  neoplastic progression and variation in metastatic efficiency by at least two  separate, but not necessarily mutually exclusive, mechanisms. First, fusion of  two contiguous tumor cells would increase the chromosome content of the resultant  single cell; this increase in ploidy could facilitate and heighten the apparent  inherent genetic instability of neoplastic cells (Nowell 1976). Although  segregation and chromosome loss may or may not be random or preferential in  nature (Campbell and Worton 1981), the mere occurrence of such a phenomenon could  also cause chromosomal disjunction and the possible extinction and reexpression  of specific genes, which would lead to the independent variation and progression   of different tumor cell characteristics in the manner cited by Foulds  (1969).(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)