Insight into stereochemistry of a new IMP allelic variant (IMP-55)  metallo-beta-lactamase identified in a clinical strain of Acinetobacter  baumannii. 

Metallo-beta-lactamases (MBLs) such as IMPs are broad-spectrum beta-lactamases  that inactivate virtually all beta-lactam antibiotics including carbapenems. In  this study, we investigated the hydrolytic activity, phylogenetic relationship,  three dimensional (3D) structure including zinc binding motif of a new IMP  variant (IMP-55) identified in a clinical strain of Acinetobacter baumannii (AB).  AB strain 56 was isolated from an adult ICU of a teaching hospital in Kerman,  Iran. It exhibited MIC 32mug/ml to imipenem and showed MBL activity. Hydrolytic  property of the MBL enzyme was measured phenotypically. Presence of blaIMP gene  encoded by class 1 integrons was detected by PCR-sequencing. Phylogenetic tree of  IMP protein was constructed using the Unweighted Pair Group Method with  Arithmetic Mean (UPGMA) and 3D model including zinc binding motif was predicted  by bioinformatics softwares. Analysis of IMP sequence led to the identification  of a novel IMP-type designated as IMP-55 (GenBank: KU299753.1; UniprotKB:  A0A0S2MTX2). Impact in term of hydrolytic activity compared to the closest  variants suggested efficient imipenem hydrolysis by this enzyme. Evolutionary  distance matrix assessment indicated that IMP-55 protein is not closely related  to other A. baumannii IMPs, however, shared 98% homology with Escherichia coli  IMP-30 (UniprotKB: A0A0C5PJR0) and Pseudomonas aeruginosa IMP-1 (UniprotKB:  Q19KT1). It consisted of five alpha-helices, ten beta-sheets and six loops. A  monovalent zinc ion attached to core of enzyme via His95, His97, His157 and  Cys176. Multiple amino acid sequence alignments and mutational trajectory with  reported IMPs showed 4 amino acid substitutions at positions 12(Phe-->Ile),  31(Asp-->Glu), 172(Leu-->Phe) and 185(Asn-->Lys). We suggest that the pleiotropic  effect of mutations due to frequent administration of imipenem is responsible for  emergence of new IMP variant in our hospitals.