Plasmids for heavy metal resistance in Alcaligenes eutrophus CH34: mechanisms and  applications.

Alcaligenes eutrophus CH34 is the main representative of a group of strongly  related strains (mostly facultative chemolithotrophs) that are well adapted to  environments containing high levels of heavy metals. It harbors the megaplasmids   pMOL28 and pMOL30 which carry resistance determinants to Co2+, Ni2+, CrO(4)2-,  Hg2+, Tl+, Cd2+, Cu2+ and Zn2+. Among the best characterized determinants are the  cnr operon (resistance to Co, Ni) on pMOL28 and the czc operon on pMOL30  (resistance to Co, Cd and Zn). Although the two systems reveal a significant  degree of amino acid similarity in the structural genes, the regulation of the  operons is different. The resistance mechanism in both cases is based on efflux.   The efflux mechanism leads to a pH increase outside of the cytoplasmic membrane.   Metals are sequestered from the external medium through the bioprecipitation of  metal carbonates formed in the saturated zone around the cell. This latter  phenomenon can be exploited in bioreactors designed to remove metals from  effluents. The bacteria are immobilized on composite membranes in a continuous  tubular membrane reactor (CTMR). The effluent continuously circulates through the  intertubular space, while the external surface of the tubes is in contact with  the growth medium. Metal crystals are eventually removed by the effluent stream  and collected on a glass bead column. The system has been applied to effluents  containing Cd, Zn, Co, Ni and Cu. By introducing catabolic plasmids involved in  the aerobic degradation of PCBs and 2,4-D into metal-resistant A. eutrophus  strains, the application range was widened to include effluents polluted with  both organic and inorganic substances. Biosensors have been developed which are  based on the fusion of genes induced by metals to a reporter system, the lux  operon of Vibrio fischeri. Bacterial luciferases produce light through the  oxidation of fatty aldehydes. The gene fusions are useful both for the study of  regulatory genes and for the determination of heavy metal concentrations in the  environment.