Multifocal outbreaks of metallo-beta-lactamase-producing Pseudomonas aeruginosa  resistant to broad-spectrum beta-lactams, including carbapenems. 

A total of 3,700 Pseudomonas aeruginosa isolates were collected from 17 general  hospitals in Japan from 1992 to 1994. Of these isolates, 132 carbapenem resistant  strains were subjected to DNA hybridization analysis with the  metallo-beta-lactamase gene (blaIMP)-specific probe. Fifteen strains carrying the  metallo-beta-lactamase gene were identified in five hospitals in different  geographical areas. Three strains of P. aeruginosa demonstrated high-level  imipenem resistance (MIC, > or = 128 micrograms/ml), two strains exhibited  low-level imipenem resistance (MIC, < or = 4 micrograms/ml), and the rest of the   strains were in between. These results revealed that the acquisition of a  metallo-beta-lactamase gene alone does not necessarily confer elevated resistance  to carbapenems. In several strains, the metallo-beta-lactamase gene was carried  by large plasmids, and carbapenem resistance was transferred from P. aeruginosa  to Escherichia coli by electroporation in association with the acquisition of the  large plasmid. Southern hybridization analysis and genomic DNA fingerprinting  profiles revealed different genetic backgrounds for these 15 isolates, although  considerable similarity was observed for the strains isolated from the same  hospital. These findings suggest that the metallo-beta-lactamase-producing P.  aeruginosa strains are not confined to a unique clonal lineage but proliferated  multifocally by plasmid-mediated dissemination of the metallo-beta-lactamase gene  in strains of different genetic backgrounds. Thus, further proliferation of  metallo-beta-lactamase-producing strains with resistance to various beta-lactams   may well be inevitable in the future, which emphasizes the need for early  recognition of metallo-beta-lactamase-producing strains, rigorous infection  control, and restricted clinical use of broad-spectrum beta-lactams including  carbapenems.