An Escherichia coli undecaprenyl-pyrophosphate phosphatase implicated in  undecaprenyl phosphate recycling. 

Undecaprenyl phosphate (Und-P) is a universal lipid carrier of glycan  biosynthetic intermediates for carbohydrate polymers that are exported to the  bacterial cell envelope. Und-P arises from the dephosphorylation of undecaprenyl   pyrophosphate (Und-PP) molecules produced by de novo synthesis and also from the   recycling of released Und-PP after the transfer of the glycan component to other   acceptor molecules. The latter reactions take place at the periplasmic side of  the plasma membrane, while cytoplasmic enzymes catalyse the de novo synthesis.  Four Und-PP pyrophosphatases were recently identified in Escherichia coli. One of  these, UppP (formerly BacA), accounts for 75 % of the total cellular Und-PP  pyrophosphatase activity and has been suggested to participate in the Und-P de  novo synthesis pathway. Unlike UppP, the other three pyrophosphatases (YbjG, YeiU  and PgpB) have a typical acid phosphatase motif also found in eukaryotic  dolichyl-pyrophosphate-recycling pyrophosphatases. This study shows that double  and triple deletion mutants in the genes uppP and ybjG, and uppP, ybjG and yeiU,   respectively, are supersensitive to the Und-P de novo biosynthesis inhibitor  fosmidomycin. In contrast, single or combined deletions including pgpB have no  effect on fosmidomycin supersensitivity. Experimental evidence is also presented   that the acid phosphatase motifs of YbjG and YeiU face the periplasmic space.  Furthermore, the quadruple deletion mutant  DeltauppP-DeltaybjG-DeltayeiU-DeltawaaL has a growth defect and abnormal cell  morphology, suggesting that accumulation of unprocessed Und-PP-linked O antigen  polysaccharides is toxic for these cells. Together, the results support the  notion that YbjG, and to a lesser extent YeiU, exert their enzymic activity on  the periplasmic side of the plasma membrane and are implicated in the recycling  of periplasmic Und-PP molecules.