Molecular epidemiology of outbreak-related pseudomonas aeruginosa strains  carrying the novel variant blaVIM-17 metallo-beta-lactamase gene. 

A study was designed to investigate the molecular epidemiological characteristics  of multidrug-resistant outbreak-related Pseudomonas aeruginosa isolates collected  in a university hospital in northern Greece. Of 29 nonreplicate P. aeruginosa  isolates resistant to carbapenems and ceftazidime, 14 were positive for  metallo-beta-lactamase production. PCR analyses with primers specific for  bla(VIM) and bla(IMP) revealed that 13 isolates carried a novel bla(VIM-2) gene  variant, designated bla(VIM-17), and only 1 isolate carried bla(VIM-2), a gene  predominant among P. aeruginosa strains in Greek hospitals. Pulsed-field gel  electrophoresis of XbaI-digested genomic DNAs showed a close genetic relationship  for 12 of 13 bla(VIM-17)-carrying outbreak-related isolates, which were of the  O11 serotype; the clonally unrelated isolate carrying bla(VIM-17) was of the O12   serotype. PCR mapping strategies for the detection of class 1 integrons and  sequencing approaches revealed the presence of integrons containing one bla(VIM)   cassette flanked by two aacA29 cassettes. These integrons were similar but not  identical to In59 (GenBank accession number AF263519) initially described in  France. All isolates carrying bla(VIM-17), regardless of their genetic profile,  had an identical integron, named In59.3, indicating that although the hospital  outbreak was mainly due to clonal dissemination, the horizontal transmission of  the bla(VIM-17)-containing integron among P. aeruginosa isolates should also have  occurred. An outbreak-related isolate and a control strain, both of which carried  the bla(VIM-2) gene but which were clonally distinct, had an identical integron,   named In59.2, which differed only at the level of the bla(VIM) gene from In59.3  integrons, suggesting a common ancestry. The spread of the bla(VIM-17)-containing  integron in clonally unrelated P. aeruginosa isolates without any evidence of  plasmid carriage is probably associated with a transposon.