Expression of the Bacillus subtilis xyl operon is repressed at the level of  transcription and is induced by xylose.

Expression of xylose isomerase was repressed in Bacillus subtilis strains W23,  168, and BR151 and could be induced in the presence of xylose. The expression was  also glucose repressed in strains 168 and BR151, although this effect was not  observed with W23. A xyl-cat fusion gene was constructed on a multicopy plasmid,   from which the xyl promoter located on a 366-base-pair (bp) DNA fragment derived   from W23 directed the expression of chloramphenicol resistance. The regulation of  expression was not very pronounced in this multicopy situation. The xyl promoter   is a strong signal for transcription initiation. The 5' sequence of the xyl mRNA   was identified by nuclease S1 mapping. The promoter consisted of the -10 sequence  TAAGAT, the -35 sequence TTGAAA spaced by 17 bp, and an upstream poly(A) block  with 14 As out of 17 bp. To study the regulation, a xyl-lacZ fusion gene was  constructed and integrated as a single copy into the amygene of B. subtilis 168.   This strain grows blue on X-Gal (5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl-beta-D-galactoside)  indicator plates in the presence of xylose and white in the presence of glucose.   Quantitatively, the induction of beta-galactosidase by xylose was 100-fold. In  the presence of xylose plus glucose, the expression of the indicator gene was  repressed to 30% of the fully induced level. About 25 to 60% of the maximal lacZ   expression was obtained with this strain when the 366-bp xyl DNA fragment was  provided in trans on a multicopy plasmid. This result indicates that repression  in the absence of xylose is mediated in trans by a soluble factor which is  expressed at a low level in B. subtilis 168. The xylose effect depended on  negative regulation. The estimations of mRNA amounts by dot blot analysis showed   unambiguously that the induction by xylose occurs at the level of transcription.   The possible molecular mechanisms are discussed with respect to the nucleotide  sequence of the 366-bp xyl regulatory DNA.