Expression of Pseudomonas aeruginosa multidrug efflux pumps MexA-MexB-OprM and  MexC-MexD-OprJ in a multidrug-sensitive Escherichia coli strain. 

The mexCD-oprJ and mexAB-oprM operons encode components of two distinct multidrug  efflux pumps in Pseudomonas aeruginosa. To assess the contribution of individual   components to antibiotic resistance and substrate specificity, these operons and   their component genes were cloned and expressed in Escherichia coli. Western  immunoblotting confirmed expression of the P. aeruginosa efflux pump components  in E. coli strains expressing and deficient in the endogenous multidrug efflux  system (AcrAB), although only the delta acrAB strain, KZM120, demonstrated  increased resistance to antibiotics in the presence of the P. aeruginosa efflux  genes. E. coli KZM120 expressing MexAB-OprM showed increased resistance to  quinolones, chloramphenicol, erythromycin, azithromycin, sodium dodecyl sulfate  (SDS), crystal violet, novobiocin, and, significantly, several beta-lactams,  which is reminiscent of the operation of this pump in P. aeruginosa. This  confirmed previous suggestions that MexAB-OprM provides a direct contribution to   beta-lactam resistance via the efflux of this group of antibiotics. An increase  in antibiotic resistance, however, was not observed when MexAB or OprM alone was   expressed in KZM120. Thus, despite the fact that beta-lactams act within the  periplasm, OprM alone is insufficient to provide resistance to these agents. E.  coli KZM120 expressing MexCD-OprJ also showed increased resistance to quinolones,  chloramphenicol, macrolides, SDS, and crystal violet, though not to most  beta-lactams or novobiocin, again somewhat reminiscent of the antibiotic  resistance profile of MexCD-OprJ-expressing strains of P. aeruginosa.  Surprisingly, E. coli KZM120 expressing MexCD alone also showed an increase in  resistance to these agents, while an OprJ-expressing KZM120 failed to demonstrate  any increase in antibiotic resistance. MexCD-mediated resistance, however, was  absent in a tolC mutant of KZM120, indicating that MexCD functions in KZM120 in  conjunction with TolC, the previously identified outer membrane component of the   AcrAB-TolC efflux system. These data confirm that a tripartite efflux pump is  necessary for the efflux of all substrate antibiotics and that the P. aeruginosa   multidrug efflux pumps are functional and retain their substrate specificity in  E. coli.