Discovery of the fourth mobile sulfonamide resistance gene. 

BACKGROUND: Over the past 75 years, human pathogens have acquired antibiotic  resistance genes (ARGs), often from environmental bacteria. Integrons play a  major role in the acquisition of antibiotic resistance genes. We therefore  hypothesized that focused exploration of integron gene cassettes from microbial  communities could be an efficient way to find novel mobile resistance genes. DNA   from polluted Indian river sediments were amplified using three sets of primers  targeting class 1 integrons and sequenced by long- and short-read technologies to  maintain both accuracy and context. RESULTS: Up to 89% of identified open reading  frames encode known resistance genes, or variations thereof (> 1000). We  identified putative novel ARGs to aminoglycosides, beta-lactams, trimethoprim,  rifampicin, and chloramphenicol, including several novel OXA variants, providing   reduced susceptibility to carbapenems. One dihydropteroate synthase gene, with  less than 34% amino acid identity to the three known mobile sulfonamide  resistance genes (sul1-3), provided complete resistance when expressed in  Escherichia coli. The mobilized gene, here named sul4, is the first mobile  sulfonamide resistance gene discovered since 2003. Analyses of adjacent DNA  suggest that sul4 has been decontextualized from a set of chromosomal genes  involved in folate synthesis in its original host, likely within the phylum  Chloroflexi. The presence of an insertion sequence common region element could  provide mobility to the entire integron. Screening of 6489 metagenomic datasets  revealed that sul4 is already widespread in seven countries across Asia and  Europe. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings show that exploring integrons from  environmental communities with a history of antibiotic exposure can provide an  efficient way to find novel, mobile resistance genes. The mobilization of a  fourth sulfonamide resistance gene is likely to provide expanded opportunities  for sulfonamide resistance to spread, with potential impacts on both human and  animal health.