Resistance to the nitroheterocyclic drugs.

The nitroheterocyclic drugs have been available since the early 1960's for the  treatment of anaerobic protozoa. The application of these drugs has widened since  then and they are presently used to treat anaerobic pathogenic bacteria and  protozoa. The activity of the nitroheterocyclic drugs depends on the  all-important nitro group attached to the imidazole or furan ring. Although the  nitro radicals, generated by reduction of the parent drugs, are similar for both   families of nitroheterocyclics, the nitroimidazoles and the nitrofurans, the  electron potential of each is different and thus the mechanism of action depends   on different pathways. The nitroimidazoles depend on reduction by ferredoxin or  flavodoxin. The nitrofurans require nitroreductase activity, but the natural  substrate of these enzymes has not been identified. Increased use of  nitroheterocyclic drugs, in response to drug resistance to other commonly used  antibiotics, has in turn resulted in drug resistance to a number of  nitroheterocyclic drugs. Bacteroides strains and other bacteria, including  Helicobacter, have developed resistance. Among the protozoa, Trichomonas has  developed resistance to metronidazole via a number of mechanisms, especially a  decrease in drug reduction, as a result of alterations in the electron transport   pathways. Resistance to both types of nitroheterocyclic drugs has been reported  in Giardia. Although resistance to these drugs is not widespread, their increased  use world-wide as a prophylaxis and in chemotherapy will inevitably result in  increased resistance in organisms commonly found in asymptomatic infections,  including Trichomonas, Giardia and Entamoeba. However, the variety of  substitutions which can be attached to the ring structures has led to a great  variety of drugs being synthesised, some of which are many-fold more active than   the commonly prescribed nitroheterocyclics. With careful administration of  currently available drugs and continued interest in synthesising more active  compounds, we can optimistically expect to have useful nitroheterocyclic drugs  available for some time.