Identification of a novel mutation at the primary dimer interface of GyrA  conferring fluoroquinolone resistance in Clostridium difficile. 

The aim of this study was to determine whether alternative resistance mechanisms,  other than mutation in the quinolone resistance-determining region (QRDR) of DNA   gyrase, could confer fluoroquinolone resistance in Clostridium difficile. An in  vitro-generated C. difficile mutant exhibiting increased fluoroquinolone  resistance was isolated through antibiotic selection on ciprofloxacin. The QRDR  of this mutant was investigated by chain-termination sequencing and was found to   be devoid of mutation. To determine the nature of the non-QRDR resistance  mechanism in this strain, the genomes of the mutant and wild-type strains were  sequenced. The gyrBA region from a collection of clinical isolates exhibiting  variable fluoroquinolone resistance levels was also sequenced and was compared  with that present in 918 publicly available C. difficile genomic data sets.  Whole-genome sequence analysis of the fluoroquinolone resistant mutant revealed a  single non-synonymous substitution (Ala384Asp) at the predicted primary dimer  interface of GyrA, far beyond the classically defined QRDR. This novel mutation  caused increased resistance to ciprofloxacin, ofloxacin, levofloxacin and  moxifloxacin while conferring hypersusceptibility to novobiocin. Several novel  extra-QRDR polymorphisms in C. difficile DNA gyrase were identified among  clinical isolates, whilst observed fluoroquinolone resistance in strains devoid  of gyrBA mutations confirmed the existence of DNA gyrase-independent resistance  mechanisms in this species. In conclusion, we report the first non-QRDR mutation   to confer fluoroquinolone resistance in C. difficile. Although the Ala384Asp  substitution was not detected in clinical isolates, this study revealed a  diversity of alternative extra-QRDR polymorphisms in DNA gyrase whose association  with fluoroquinolone resistance warrants further investigation.