Physiological studies of chloramine resistance developed by Klebsiella pneumoniae  under low-nutrient growth conditions.

This study investigated the physiological mechanisms of resistance to chloramines  developed by Klebsiella pneumoniae grown in a nutrient-limited environment.  Growth under these conditions resulted in cells that were smaller than cells  grown under high-nutrient conditions and extensively aggregated. Cellular  aggregates ranged from 10 to more than 10,000 cells per aggregate, with a mean  population aggregate size of 90 cells. This aggregation may have been facilitated  by the presence of extracellular polymer material. By using glucose as a  reference of capsule content, it was determined that growth under low-nutrient  conditions produced cells with 8 x 10(-14) to 41 x 10(-14) g of carbohydrate per   cell, with a mean +/- standard deviation of 27 x 10(-14) +/- 16 x 10(-14) g of  carbohydrate per cell. In comparison, growth under high-nutrient conditions  resulted in 2.7 x 10(-14) to 5.9 x 10(-14) g of carbohydrate per cell, with a  mean and standard deviation of 4.3 x 10(-14) +/- 1.2 x 10(-14) g of carbohydrate   per cell. Cell wall and cell membrane lipids also varied with growth conditions.   The ratio of saturated to unsaturated fatty acids in cells grown under  low-nutrient conditions was approximately five times greater than that in cells  grown under high-nutrient conditions, suggesting possible differences in membrane  permeability. An analysis of sulfhydryl (-SH) groups revealed no quantitative  difference with respect to growth conditions. However, upon exposure to  chloramines, only 33% of the -SH groups of cells grown under low-nutrient  conditions were oxidized, compared with 80% oxidization of -SH groups in cells  grown under high-nutrient conditions. The reduced effectiveness of chloramine  oxidization of -SH groups in cells grown under low-nutrient conditions may be due  to restricted penetration of chloramines into the cells, conformational changes  of enzymes, or a combination of both factors. The results of this study suggest  that chloramine resistance developed under low-nutrient growth conditions may be   a function of multiple physiological factors, including cellular aggregation and   protection of sulfhydryl groups within the cell.