Ruminal microbiology, biotechnology, and ruminant nutrition: progress and  problems.

Present methods for manipulating ruminal fermentation that involve microbial  biotechnology include dietary ionophores, antibiotics, and microbial feed  additives. Developments in recombinant DNA technology mean that future methods  will have a much wider scope. It has been suggested that genetically engineered  ruminal microorganisms will be used in future to improve ruminal fermentation.  Several technical objectives must be achieved before that will be possible.  First, methods for inserting foreign or modified genes into ruminal  microorganisms and ensuring their efficient expression must be developed. Broad  host range plasmids and transposons have been used successfully to introduce new   DNA into ruminal bacteria, as have shuttle vectors constructed as chimeras of  plasmids from ruminal species and Escherichia coli. Although so far only  antibiotic resistance markers have been transferred, the prospects for  introducing other genes into selected ruminal bacteria are excellent. Second, the  expression of the gene product(s) should be known to be nutritionally useful in  vivo. A few examples of this type of benefit have been demonstrated, and many  more proposed, including polysaccharidases for improving fiber digestion, methods  for improving the amino acid composition of ruminal bacteria, and breakdown of  plant toxins. Third, the difficulty that has been examined least, yet may prove  most difficult to overcome, is that mechanisms have to be found for introducing  and maintaining the new strain in the mixed ruminal population. Factors governing  the survival of new strains in vivo are ill-understood, and attempts to select in  favor of added new organisms have so far been unsuccessful. Because of the last  obstacle, it may be advantageous, at least in the short term, to use nonruminal  organisms, such as Saccharomyces cerevisiae, rather than indigenous ruminal  species as a vehicle for implementing the benefits of recombinant DNA technology   to ruminal fermentation. Yeast is already in widespread use as a feed additive,  so no enrichment is necessary; and its genetics are already well known.  Alternatively, adding particular enzymes to the diet may achieve some of the  objectives described above, with the advantage that the manipulation could be  achieved without the release of a recombinant microorganism.