The bacteriology of acute pneumonia and meningitis in children in Papua New  Guinea: assumptions, facts and technical strategies.

Acute respiratory infections in children aged less than 5 years in the Eastern  Highlands of Papua New Guinea were investigated bacteriologically for 10 years  from November 1978. Haemophilus influenzae and Streptococcus pneumoniae were  responsible for 73% of all bacteria cultured from lung aspirate (83 samples),  85.5% from blood (1024 samples) and 92% from cerebrospinal fluid (155 samples).  Nonencapsulated H. influenzae was carried by up to 90% of children and was the  predominant haemophilus type cultured from lung tissue. Mixed infections of the  lung with two types of H. influenzae (8 cases) and both H. influenzae and S.  pneumoniae (18 cases), commonly together with other organisms of questionable  pathogenicity, reflected the proximity of this organ to the upper respiratory  tract. Serotype b accounted for 62% and 82% of H. influenzae isolated from  bacteraemic pneumonia and meningitis cases, respectively. Polymicrobic  bacteraemic pneumonia occurred in 16 children. Both H. influenzae and S.  pneumoniae establish dense, unregulated long-term colonization in the nasopharynx  during the neonatal period. Each inhibit autochthonous microflora by mechanisms  that are currently unclear. Infections with two or more types occur in 30% (S.  pneumoniae) and 60% (H. influenzae) of carriage-positive children. 70-75% of H.  influenzae and S. pneumoniae isolates from blood concomitantly colonize the upper  respiratory tract. Intense exposure of Papua New Guinean children to penicillin  at all levels of health care since the 1940s has resulted in widespread relative   resistance among pneumococci to this antibiotic. Resistant strains are now found   in 32 serotypes, and in children penicillin resistance is present in 75% of all  carriage strains and 52% and 22% of blood and cerebrospinal fluid isolates,  respectively. Penicillin susceptible and resistant pneumococcal serotypes  commonly coexist in multiply populated carriage sites. Resistance to betalactam  antibiotics is rare among H. influenzae strains and resistance has not been  detected in either H. influenzae or S. pneumoniae to chloramphenicol,  erythromycin, tetracycline or cotrimoxazole. It should not be assumed that the  technology of respiratory bacteriology as it is practised in developed countries   can be transferred to the third world for utilization in paediatric aetiology and  carriage studies. Respiratory bacteriology strategies as they evolved in Goroka  were subject to diverse influences. The type distribution of the major causative   agents defied fashionable beliefs, generated the need for more precise  epidemiological differentiation and, by virtue of their carriage density,  cultural properties and response to commonly used antibiotics, required the  introduction or development of compatible diagnostic procedures.