Immune response to progressor variants derived from transfection of an  ultraviolet radiation-induced C3H mouse regressor tumor cell line with activated   Harvey-ras oncogene.

Skin cancers induced in mice by UV radiation often exhibit a regressor phenotype.  In order to determine how tumors escape the immune defenses of the normal  immunocompetent host, we sought to isolate progressor variants from a UV  radiation-induced C3H mouse regressor fibrosarcoma cell line, UV-2240, by  transfection with an activated Ha-ras oncogene. A cotransfection protocol using  pSV2-neo DNA, which confers resistance to the antibiotic G418, was used to select  transfected cells. Injection of Ha-ras-transfected UV-2240 cells s.c. into  immunocompetent C3H mice produced tumors in four of 36 animals. In contrast,  UV-2240 cells transfected with pSV2-neo DNA alone or mock transfected with CaPO4   did not produce tumors in normal C3H mice. DNAs from cell lines established from   Ha-ras-induced tumors contained unique Ha-ras sequences in addition to those  sequences endogenous to UV-2240 cells. However, the Ha-ras-induced progressor  variants did not overexpress the Mr 21,000 protein. The Ha-ra-induced progressor   variants produced experimental lung metastasis in both normal C3H and nude mice,   although they induced more lung nodules in nude mice than in normal C3H mice. In   addition, all four Ha-ras-induced progressor variants produced significantly more  experimental lung metastases in nude mice than did the parent UV-2240 cell line.   However, both the parental UV-2240 cell line and the Ha-ras-induced progressor  variants expressed similar levels of H-2Kk and H-2Dk antigens and were  immunologically cross-reactive, as determined by in vitro cytotoxic T-lymphocyte   and in vivo immunization-challenge assays. These results indicate that the  progressor phenotype of the Ha-ras-induced tumor variants is not due to loss of  tumor-specific transplantation or Class I major histocompatibility complex  antigens. This implies that some tumor cells can escape the immune defenses of  the normal immunocompetent host by mechanisms other than loss of tumor-specific  transplantation and Class I major histocompatibility antigens.