Drug transport mechanism of the AcrB efflux pump. 

In Gram-negative bacteria such as Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas aeruginosa,  tripartite multidrug efflux systems extrude cytotoxic substances from the cell  directly into the medium bypassing periplasm and the outer membrane. In E. coli,   the tripartite efflux system AcrA/AcrB/TolC is the pump that extrudes multiple  antibiotics, dyes, bile salts and detergents. The inner membrane component AcrB,   a member of the Resistance Nodulation cell Division (RND) family, is the major  site for substrate recognition and energy transduction of the entire tripartite  system. The drug/proton antiport processes in this secondary transporter are  suggested to be spatially separated, a feature frequently observed for primary  transporters like membrane-bound ATPases. The recently elucidated asymmetric  structure of the AcrB trimer reveals three different monomer conformations  proposed to represent consecutive states in a directional transport cycle. Each  monomer shows a distinct tunnel system with entrances located at the boundary of   the outer leaflet of the inner membrane and the periplasm through the periplasmic  porter (pore) domain towards the funnel of the trimer and TolC. In one monomer a   hydrophobic pocket is present which has been shown to bind the AcrB substrates  minocyclin and doxorubicin. The energy conversion from the proton motive force  into drug efflux includes proton binding in (and release from) the transmembrane   part. The conformational changes observed within a triad of essential, titratable  residues (D407/D408/K940) residing in the hydrophobic transmembrane domain appear  to be transduced by transmembrane helix 8 and associated with the conformational   changes seen in the periplasmic domain. From the asymmetric structure a possible   peristaltic pump transport mechanism based on a functional rotation of the AcrB  trimer has been postulated. The novel drug transport model combines the alternate  access pump mechanism with the rotating site catalysis of F(1)F(o) ATPase as  originally postulated by Jardetzky and Boyer, respectively, and suggests a  working hypothesis for the transport mechanism of RND transporters in general.