Molecular and biochemical characterization of VEB-1, a novel class A  extended-spectrum beta-lactamase encoded by an Escherichia coli integron gene. 

A clinical isolate, Escherichia coli MG-1, isolated from a 4-month-old Vietnamese  orphan child, produced a beta-lactamase conferring resistance to  extended-spectrum cephalosporins and aztreonam. In a disk diffusion test, a  typical synergistic effect between ceftazidime or aztreonam and clavulanic acid  was observed along with an unusual synergy between cefoxitin and cefuroxime. The   gene for VEB-1 (Vietnamese extended-spectrum beta-lactamase) was cloned and  expressed in E. coli JM109. The recombinant plasmid pRLT1 produced a  beta-lactamase with a pI of 5.35 and conferred high-level resistance to  extended-spectrum (or oxyimino) cephalosporins and to aztreonam. Vmax values for   extended-spectrum cephalosporins were uncommonly high, while the affinity of the   enzyme for ceftazidime and aztreonam was relatively low. blaVEB-1 showed  significant homology at the DNA level with only blaPER-1 and blaPER-2. Analysis  of the deduced protein sequence showed that VEB-1 is a class A penicillinase  having very low levels of homology with any other known beta-lactamases. The  highest percentage of amino acid identity was 38% with PER-1 or PER-2, two  uncommon class A extended-spectrum enzymes. Exploration of the genetic  environment of blaVEB-1 revealed the presence of gene cassette features, i.e.,  (i) a 59-base element associated with blaVEB-1; (ii) a second 59-base element  just upstream of blaVEB-1, likely belonging to the aacA1-orfG gene cassette;  (iii) two core sites (GTTRRRY) on both sides of blaVEB-1; and (iv) a second  antibiotic resistance gene 3' of blaVEB-1, aadB. blaVEB-1 may therefore be the  first class A extended-spectrum beta-lactamase that is part of a gene cassette,  which itself is likely to be located on a class 1 integron, as sulfamide  resistance may indicate. Furthermore, blaVEB-1 is encoded on a large (> 100-kb)  transferable plasmid found in a Klebsiella pneumoniae MG-2 isolated at the same  time from the same patient, indicating a horizontal gene transfer.