Response of Pseudomonas aeruginosa to pyocyanin: mechanisms of resistance,  antioxidant defenses, and demonstration of a manganese-cofactored superoxide  dismutase.

Pseudomonas aeruginosa produces a blue pigment, pyocyanin. Pyocyanin is a  redox-active phenazine compound that kills mammalian and bacterial cells through   the generation of reactive oxygen intermediates. We examined the mechanisms by  which P. aeruginosa resists pyocyanin. [14C]pyocyanin was taken up by both  Escherichia coli and P. aeruginosa, though more slowly by the latter.  Cyanide-insensitive respiration, used as an indicator of intracellular superoxide  and/or hydrogen peroxide production, was 50-fold less in pyocyanin treated P.  aeruginosa than in E. coli. P. aeruginosa showed less cyanide-insensitive  respiration than E. coli upon exposure to other redox-active compounds (paraquat,  streptonigrin, and plumbagin). Electron paramagnetic resonance spectrometry and  spin trapping showed that P. aeruginosa generated less pyocyanin radical and  superoxide than E. coli. Cell extracts from E. coli contained an NADPH:pyocyanin   oxidoreductase which increased the rate of reduction of pyocyanin by NADPH.  Conversely, cell extracts from P. aeruginosa contained no NADPH:pyocyanin  oxidoreductase activity and actually decreased the rate of pyocyanin mediated  NADPH oxidation. Antioxidant defenses could also reduce the sensitivity of P.  aeruginosa to pyocyanin. Under culture conditions of limited phosphate, both  pyocyanin production and catalase activity were enhanced. Superoxide dismutase  activity was also increased under low-phosphate conditions. When cells were grown  in a high-phosphate succinate medium, P. aeruginosa formed a previously described  iron-superoxide dismutase as well as a manganese-cofactored superoxide dismutase.  These results demonstrate that P. aeruginosa resists pyocyanin because of limited  redox cycling of this compound and that under conditions favoring pyocyanin  production, catalase and superoxide dismutase activities increase.