Resistance to cadmium, cobalt, zinc, and nickel in microbes.

The divalent cations of cobalt, zinc, and nickel are essential nutrients for  bacteria, required as trace elements at nanomolar concentrations. However, at  micro- or millimolar concentrations, Co2+, Zn2+, and Ni2+ (and "bad ions" without  nutritional roles such as Cd2+) are toxic. These cations are transported into the  cell by constitutively expressed divalent cation uptake systems of broad  specificity, i.e., basically Mg2+ transport systems. Therefore, in case of a  heavy metal stress, uptake of the toxic ions cannot be reduced by a simple  down-regulation of the transport activity. As a response to the resulting metal  toxicity, metal resistance determinants evolved which are mostly plasmid-encoded   in bacteria. In contrast to that of the cation Hg2+, chemical reduction of Co2+,   Zn2+, Ni2+, and Cd2+ by the cell is not possible or sensible. Therefore, other  than mutations limiting the ion range of the uptake system, only two basic  mechanisms of resistance to these ions are possible (and were developed by  evolution): intracellular complexation of the toxic metal ion is mainly used in  eucaryotes; the cadmium-binding components are phytochelatins in plant and yeast   cells and metallothioneins in animals, plants, and yeasts. In contrast, reduced  accumulation based on an active efflux of the cation is the primary mechanism  developed in procaryotes and perhaps in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. All bacterial  cation efflux systems characterized to date are plasmid-encoded and inducible but  differ in energy-coupling and in the number and types of proteins involved in  metal transport and in regulation. In the gram-positive multiple-metal-resistant   bacterium Staphylococcus aureus, Cd2+ (and probably Zn2+) efflux is catalyzed by   the membrane-bound CadA protein, a P-type ATPase. However, a second protein  (CadC) is required for full resistance and a third one (CadR) is hypothesized for  regulation of the resistance determinant. The czc determinant from the  gram-negative multiple-metal-resistant bacterium Alcaligenes eutrophus encodes  proteins required for Co2+, Zn2+, and Cd2+ efflux (CzcA, CzcB, and CzcC) and  regulation of the czc determinant (CzcD). In the current working model CzcA works  as a cation-proton antiporter, CzcB as a cation-binding subunit, and CzcC as a  modifier protein required to change the substrate specificity of the system from   Zn2+ only to Co2+, Zn2+, and Cd2+.